Hi there.
This is Telemundo.
And welcome back.
As I mentioned in the previous lecture, interfaces help in defining optional capability without compromising
on polymorphism.
And by polymorphism, we mean that interfaces help in defining a common protocol, which in turn helps
in achieving polymorphism.
So let's see how interfaces help in doing so.
It's going to be a lengthy discussion on interfaces as we want to go beyond understanding just the syntax.
The syntax part is easy.
We want to get a clear understanding of the role that interfaces play so that we can design good object
oriented software.
So we will focus on those aspects and demo.
Where syntax is put into action will be part of one of the subsequent lectures.
Now we know this.
A super type defines a common protocol for all its subtypes.
That is, the super type is announcing that both myself and all my subtypes have these kinds of methods.
Essentially a super type is specifying a contract which tells what itself and any of its subtypes would
offer.
So super type defines a contract and we know that a super type can be a class and the contract would
be all public and protected methods of the class.
And if class is abstract, then contract would additionally include abstract methods.
The whether it is abstract or not can define instance variables to that is the state.
Moreover, if these variables are declared public, they will also be part of the contract.
Even static variables declared as public would be part of contract.
Now a super type can also be an interface and the syntax of interface looks very similar to a class
and we will look at it shortly.
But the main difference is that the reserved keyword class is replaced with the reserved keyword interface,
but with interface the contract would mostly be only public abstract methods.
That is, typically you will not see any concrete methods.
Prior to Java eight, it used to be only public abstract methods, but since Java eight onwards, an
interface can also have concrete methods as we will see later.
But generally you can expect them to contain only abstract methods.
Interfaces would have subclasses which provide the actual implementations for those abstract methods.
Moreover, interfaces will not have any state.
That is, they cannot have instance variables.
So interfaces are stateless.
And since there are no instance variables, there is no point instantiating them.
That is, they are non interchangeable and it clearly makes sense as the whole point of creating an
object is to store some state that is unique to the object and manipulate that state via the instance
methods.
Since interfaces cannot contain instance variables, you cannot have state and hence it would be meaningless
to instantiate them.
So obviously interfaces do not contain any constructors too as a constructor is needed in order to create
an object.
So essentially an interface generally has only abstract methods which we know do not have any method
implementations.
And hence can be considered as pure contract.
An interface can be considered as pure contract.
That is, it just states what methods it represents and does not say anything about the method implementations.
Method implementations would be provided by subclasses of the interface, so it is much more generic
than classes, including abstract classes.
As with classes, you are able to define some concrete behavior that is methods with implementation.
Moreover, with classes you can have instance variables to.
Because of this lack of implementation, we can achieve more flexible designs.
For instance, as we see here with interfaces, Java allows a class to be a subclass of multiple interfaces
in addition to being a subclass of another class.
So here the subclass is in Blue Circle and it is a subclass of one superclass and three interfaces.
We couldn't do this with just the classes, as Java does not support multiple inheritance of classes
due to the ambiguity of inheriting methods with same names from multiple super classes.
Moreover, it's also very common for the same interface to have multiple subclasses.
And these subclasses can be from completely different projects to.
And all of this will be clear as we progress through this section and the course to.
Now let's look at the syntax for defining an interface.
As mentioned earlier, the declaration is similar to a class.
Only difference is that the keyword class is replaced with the keyword interface, and the keyword interface
is followed by the interface name.
An interface as mentioned earlier, is non intangible and hence is implicitly abstract.
You can in fact include the keyword abstract within the declaration and the compiler will not complain.
But let's not do that as it would be redundant.
The modifier public is optional, although typically you would mostly see interfaces that are public.
So they do have the public modifier.
We know that if we exclude the modifier public, it means that interface is visible only within the
package.
So that's the default access, that is the package, private access.
And we cannot have any other access modifiers in an interface declaration, and that is the case with
class two.
So both class and interface can have only default or public access levels.
That is no private or protected access levels.
So just take that in your mind.
Classes on interfaces can have only default or public access levels.
Coming to what an interface can have.
It can include static, constant variables, that is variables declared with static and final modifiers.
So you can have static variables that are final two.
But keep in mind that interfaces cannot have instance variables as specified earlier.
And as discussed earlier, it can also include abstract methods.
That is methods with no bodies.
We also said that prior to Java eight it used to be only abstract methods, but since Java eight onwards,
an interface can also have concrete methods as we will next see.
But generally you can expect them to contain only abstract methods.
Even static variables are not that commonly seen in interfaces.
So prior to Java eight, an interface was considered as 100% pure abstract class.
That is, it would include only abstract methods.
However, with Java eight interfaces can also have some implementation in the form of something called
default and static methods.
Unlike abstract methods, these methods would have method bodies.
That is, there are concrete methods.
So from Java eight onwards, interfaces are no longer 100% pure abstract classes.
Static methods are just like the static methods we know about.
And later we will look at why these two kinds of methods were introduced in Java eight.
Finally, interfaces can also include nested types, which means it can include nested classes or nested
interfaces.
Nested types will be discussed in a separate section, so let's not worry about them for now.
In general, mostly abstract methods are the only ones you will see in interfaces and hence is emphasized
in red color in the slide.
Sometimes you may see other members like default methods or static final variables, but most of the
time it would be abstract methods.
Also note that all of these members of an interface are implicitly public, so you don't have to explicitly
specify the modifier public in case of abstract methods, the abstract modifier is also implicit and
hence can be omitted.
And here is the example interface declaration for our new requirement.
So we have the interface named as shareable with the abstract method get item data.
Since it is abstract method, it does not have any implementation and ends with a semicolon, but the
modifier abstract is omitted as it is implicit.
As I stated earlier, public modifier can also be omitted as it is implicit for any member in an interface.
And as a matter of style, it is discouraged to explicitly specify default modifiers.
So let's not include default modifiers in the code that we write.
Although there are no variables in this example, any variables declared in an interface are, by default,
public, static and final.
So once again, you don't have to include these modifiers explicitly.
As mentioned earlier, all interface members are public by default.
So regardless of whether it is a variable method or a nested class or a nested interface, it would
have a public access level by default.
You cannot use either private or protected modifiers with interface members.
They can have only public access levels.
So you may then ask what about accessibility only within the package?
And that would happen if the interface itself has a default access that is, public modifier is omitted
from the interface declaration and in that case, the public access level of interface members no longer
apply and those members are not visible outside the package.
So basically the public access level of members is overridden by the default access level specified
in the interface declaration.
But generally you will see interfaces to how public access level.
Also interfaces are important, just like the way we import classes.
And here is how you would subclass an interface for classes.
We know that the keyword expense is used, but for interface you would use the keyword implements.
So in our example, both book and web classes would implement shareable and would provide their own
implementations for get item data method.
And both classes still extend the bookmark class.
Note that the mobi class would only extend bookmark but will not implement shareable as we know that
it should not be shared with the partner website.
With regards to the keywords extents and implements semantically also they make sense.
For instance, the keyword implements suggests that a class is going to implement the abstract methods
declared in an interface, but the keyword extends such as that a class is going to extend the functionality
of a superclass.
That is, it is going to inherit the concrete methods, but is also going to provide implementation
for abstract methods.
And of course it can also add some new methods, thus extending the functionality.
Note that if class declaration includes both extents as well as implements class, then implements class
must always follow the extents class.
Otherwise you get a compilation error.
You can also have instances where a class only implements one or more interfaces but does not extend
any class.
And that's possible to.
So here is the new class diagram with book and weblink classes, implementing the shareable interface
and providing implementations for get item data method.
Multiple inheritance is no longer an issue now as only one class bookmark is extended while the other
is an interface.
Just a quick note on the notation here.
As we have something new in this class diagram, we indicate an interface by using the keyword interface
about the interface name.
Moreover, the implements relationship is indicated using dotted line, but for excellent relationship
it is always going to be solid line.
And regarding the arrow at the end of the dotted line, strictly speaking, it must be a closed arrow
like a triangle, and that applies to both interface as well as the expense relationship.
But in this course, let's simply stick to this notation.
So by using interface we achieved our objective.
That is only weblink and book classes have the shareable capability.
That is only these two classes define the get item data method.
Also now a common protocol is defined via the shareable interface.
This common protocol does not apply to the movie class as it does not implement shareable.
So shareable interface defines the optional capability that web link and book need, and it also provides
a common protocol.
And the beauty here is that we also get the polymorphic benefits of multiple inheritance.
That is in our example.
A book object can now be assigned to a variable of reference type shareable in addition to a variable
of reference type bookmark.
So the book class is a subtype of shareable too.
Just like the way it's a subtype of the bookmark class.
So a class implementing an interface is a subtype of that interface.
So both book and web link in addition to being book and web link.
They are also of two other types now which are shareable and bookmark.
And this is not possible.
A movie object cannot be assigned to a variable of the type shareable as it does not implement shareable.
That is, it is not a subtype of shareable.
Keep in mind that this is also not possible as an interface is non tangible.
So an interface can only be a reference type and it can never be an object type.
So always keep that in mind.
Not that in general, the term type is often used to refer to either a class or an interface.
On this slide shows an example where an interface is used as a method parameter type.
So here the method go has shareable as a method parameter type, and it can be invoked by passing either
book or weblink objects, but not movie objects.
And within the method, get item data method is being invoked on the method parameter.
So if a book object is passed, then its version of get item data method would be invoked.
Similarly, if weblink object is passed, then its version of get item data gets invoked.
So it's just like in the case of using a superclass as the method parameter type.
So what we are seeing here is essentially polymorphism.
As mentioned earlier, a class can be a subclass of multiple interfaces.
That is, a class can implement multiple interfaces.
As you can see here, the class implements Sharable as well as another commonly used interface called
compatible, which is from the Java Lang package.
And we will look at this interface later and the two interfaces are simply comma separated and we can
also have more interfaces.
With this.
The book class also overwrites the abstract method compared to which is defined by comparable interface.
By implementing comparable interface, a class announces that its objects can be compared with each
other, and it is useful when we want to store those objects in certain order and this interface will
be discussed later.
Now, for someone looking at this class definition, when they just look at the compatible interface
in the declaration part, instantly they know that the objects of this class can be compatible with
each other.
Now, you can relate this to a doctor having multiple degrees where the degrees are the interfaces.
Just looking at the degrees, we know the capabilities of the doctor.
And that's exactly the case here.
Just looking at the two interfaces in the book classes declaration, we know that any book object offers
the capabilities to be shared and compared.
Now a book object can also be assigned to a variable whose type is comparable.
So by implementing comparable book classes, offering a new capability that comparable represents.
So that's about the main introduction to interfaces.
Just to summarize, an interface is simply a pure contract and it is much more generic than even abstract
classes.
It doesn't even have a state, so it is just a very high level specification that subclasses would implement.
There are few more important things we need to still discuss about interfaces, and we will do it in
the next lecture.
After that, we will do a demo of everything that we have learned.
Thank you.